---
layout: post
comments: true
title:  "On typing"
date:   2016-12-31 23:23:30 +0100
categories: Software
tags: typing
---

I have been learning touch typing for a while now. It is a valuable endeavor.
The practice entails flexibility. And by reflecting on my behavior, 
I am witnessing patterns and extracting lessons.
The lessons won't apply anywhere. But, it is a reasonable idea to identify
their usefulness, as well as the context where each brings the most
benefit. This helps me improve my workflow.

A tool becomes invisible if it is used adequately.
It could be, then, appropriately described as a continuum of the master
more than as a mean to reach his purpose.
Likewise, each problem the user faces with a tool hinders his ability
to focus more on the outcome.
He may find himself struggling with the tool instead of accomplishing his intended
mission.

Activities, as rigid as typing, could benefit from this view of tooling.
When shaped as a tool, typing moves expressions in the human mind to the computer.
So, mastering its intricacies could make this process straightforward
and eliminates a lot of wasted time and energy.
This turns out to be quite useful to me.
I was working toward internalizing habits such as writing and taking notes while reading.
Typing them quickly is helping me to keep focus and to avoid breaking up my line of thoughts.

Another thing I learned from touch typing is how 'Less is more' works in the real world.
The less I focus on speed and put in more effort into pressing the convenient keys,
the faster I type.
This translates very well to the world of programming and the making of design decisions.
It is a pattern of thinking. 
Indeed, the faster I rush and make a decision, the more it turns out to be a bad fit.

Optimising for typing speed is not a good idea, even when we are late.
As a programmer,
I reassure that most of the time of the programmer is spent thinking.
If it is not the case, either the task being done shall be automated, or the code
being written shall be thrown away as soon as possible.
I type far less code as I acquire more experience 
and learn new ways of problem-solving.
Meanwhile, typing fast is nice for experimentation and for testing hypothesis.
For a certain class of programming activities, 
it is important to get feedback about the work being done as soon as possible.

This is often the case when I work on code bases I never dealt with before.
My mind is easily fooled by false symmetries and biases.
Thus, I find aspects of the actual code that I have missed only late.
I am able to spot those fallacies early when I make hypothesis about the existing code
and test them before going on with a series of thoughts and making a set of new decisions.
Typing fast here is helpful for writing automated checks, 
knowing that I will throw out some lines of code.

It is not unusual for me to rewrite or to remove the last lines of code I write.
There is a lot of value in those lines. They help me dismiss the false assumptions 
I made and learn what could be a better fit for in next attempts.
